docs/source/_rst/tutorials/tutorial5/tutorial.rst, before:

Tutorial: Two dimensional Darcy flow using the Fourier Neural Operator
======================================================================

In this tutorial we are going to solve the Darcy flow problem in two
dimensions, presented in `Fourier Neural Operator for Parametric Partial
Differential Equation <https://openreview.net/pdf?id=c8P9NQVtmnO>`__.
First of all we import the modules needed for the tutorial. Importing
``scipy`` is needed for input output operations.

.. code:: ipython3

    # !pip install scipy  # install scipy
    from scipy import io
    import torch
    from pina.model import FNO, FeedForward  # let's import some models
    from pina import Condition, LabelTensor
    from pina.solvers import SupervisedSolver
    from pina.trainer import Trainer
    from pina.problem import AbstractProblem
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

Data Generation
---------------

We will focus on solving the a specfic PDE, the **Darcy Flow** equation.
The Darcy PDE is a second order, elliptic PDE with the following form:

.. math::


   -\nabla\cdot(k(x, y)\nabla u(x, y)) = f(x) \quad (x, y) \in D.

Specifically, :math:`u` is the flow pressure, :math:`k` is the
permeability field and :math:`f` is the forcing function. The Darcy flow
can parameterize a variety of systems including flow through porous
media, elastic materials and heat conduction. Here you will define the
domain as a 2D unit square Dirichlet boundary conditions. The dataset is
taken from the authors original reference.

.. code:: ipython3

    # download the dataset
    data = io.loadmat("Data_Darcy.mat")
    
    # extract data (we use only 100 data for train)
    k_train = LabelTensor(torch.tensor(data['k_train'], dtype=torch.float).unsqueeze(-1), ['u0'])
    u_train = LabelTensor(torch.tensor(data['u_train'], dtype=torch.float).unsqueeze(-1), ['u'])
    k_test =  LabelTensor(torch.tensor(data['k_test'], dtype=torch.float).unsqueeze(-1), ['u0'])
    u_test= LabelTensor(torch.tensor(data['u_test'], dtype=torch.float).unsqueeze(-1), ['u'])
    x = torch.tensor(data['x'], dtype=torch.float)[0]
    y = torch.tensor(data['y'], dtype=torch.float)[0]

Let’s visualize some data

.. code:: ipython3

    plt.subplot(1, 2, 1)
    plt.title('permeability')
    plt.imshow(k_train.squeeze(-1)[0])
    plt.subplot(1, 2, 2)
    plt.title('field solution')
    plt.imshow(u_train.squeeze(-1)[0])
    plt.show()



.. image:: tutorial_files/tutorial_6_0.png


We now create the neural operator class. It is a very simple class,
inheriting from ``AbstractProblem``.

.. code:: ipython3

    class NeuralOperatorSolver(AbstractProblem):
        input_variables = k_train.labels
        output_variables = u_train.labels
        conditions = {'data' : Condition(input_points=k_train, 
                                         output_points=u_train)}
    
    # make problem
    problem = NeuralOperatorSolver()

Solving the problem with a FeedForward Neural Network
-----------------------------------------------------

We will first solve the problem using a Feedforward neural network. We
will use the ``SupervisedSolver`` for solving the problem, since we are
training using supervised learning.

.. code:: ipython3

    # make model
    model = FeedForward(input_dimensions=1, output_dimensions=1)
    
    
    # make solver
    solver = SupervisedSolver(problem=problem, model=model)
    
    # make the trainer and train
    trainer = Trainer(solver=solver, max_epochs=10, accelerator='cpu', enable_model_summary=False, batch_size=10) # we train on CPU and avoid model summary at beginning of training (optional)
    trainer.train()



.. parsed-literal::

    GPU available: False, used: False
    TPU available: False, using: 0 TPU cores
    IPU available: False, using: 0 IPUs
    HPU available: False, using: 0 HPUs


.. parsed-literal::

    Epoch 9: : 100it [00:00, 357.28it/s, v_num=1, mean_loss=0.108]

.. parsed-literal::

    `Trainer.fit` stopped: `max_epochs=10` reached.


.. parsed-literal::

    Epoch 9: : 100it [00:00, 354.81it/s, v_num=1, mean_loss=0.108]


The final loss is pretty high… We can calculate the error by importing
``LpLoss``.

.. code:: ipython3

    from pina.loss import LpLoss
    
    # make the metric
    metric_err = LpLoss(relative=True)
    
    
    err = float(metric_err(u_train.squeeze(-1), solver.neural_net(k_train).squeeze(-1)).mean())*100
    print(f'Final error training {err:.2f}%')
    
    err = float(metric_err(u_test.squeeze(-1), solver.neural_net(k_test).squeeze(-1)).mean())*100
    print(f'Final error testing {err:.2f}%')


.. parsed-literal::

    Final error training 56.04%
    Final error testing 56.01%


Solving the problem with a Fuorier Neural Operator (FNO)
--------------------------------------------------------

We will now move to solve the problem using a FNO. Since we are learning
operator this approach is better suited, as we shall see.

.. code:: ipython3

    # make model
    lifting_net = torch.nn.Linear(1, 24)
    projecting_net = torch.nn.Linear(24, 1)
    model = FNO(lifting_net=lifting_net,
                projecting_net=projecting_net,
                n_modes=8,
                dimensions=2,
                inner_size=24,
                padding=8)
    
    
    # make solver
    solver = SupervisedSolver(problem=problem, model=model)
    
    # make the trainer and train
    trainer = Trainer(solver=solver, max_epochs=10, accelerator='cpu', enable_model_summary=False, batch_size=10) # we train on CPU and avoid model summary at beginning of training (optional)
    trainer.train()



.. parsed-literal::

    GPU available: False, used: False
    TPU available: False, using: 0 TPU cores
    IPU available: False, using: 0 IPUs
    HPU available: False, using: 0 HPUs


.. parsed-literal::

    Epoch 0: : 0it [00:00, ?it/s]Epoch 9: : 100it [00:02, 47.76it/s, v_num=4, mean_loss=0.00106] 

.. parsed-literal::

    `Trainer.fit` stopped: `max_epochs=10` reached.


.. parsed-literal::

    Epoch 9: : 100it [00:02, 47.65it/s, v_num=4, mean_loss=0.00106]


We can clearly see that the final loss is lower. Let’s see in testing..
Notice that the number of parameters is way higher than a
``FeedForward`` network. We suggest to use GPU or TPU for a speed up in
training, when many data samples are used.

.. code:: ipython3

    err = float(metric_err(u_train.squeeze(-1), solver.neural_net(k_train).squeeze(-1)).mean())*100
    print(f'Final error training {err:.2f}%')
    
    err = float(metric_err(u_test.squeeze(-1), solver.neural_net(k_test).squeeze(-1)).mean())*100
    print(f'Final error testing {err:.2f}%')


.. parsed-literal::

    Final error training 4.83%
    Final error testing 5.16%


As we can see the loss is way lower!

What’s next?
------------

We have made a very simple example on how to use the ``FNO`` for
learning neural operator. Currently in **PINA** we implement 1D/2D/3D
cases. We suggest to extend the tutorial using more complex problems and
train for longer, to see the full potential of neural operators.

Commit message:

Colab tutorials (#367)
* Colab Button & Run added

docs/source/_rst/tutorials/tutorial5/tutorial.rst, after:

Tutorial: Two dimensional Darcy flow using the Fourier Neural Operator
======================================================================

|Open In Colab|

.. |Open In Colab| image:: https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg
   :target: https://colab.research.google.com/github/mathLab/PINA/blob/master/tutorials/tutorial5/tutorial.ipynb

In this tutorial we are going to solve the Darcy flow problem in two
dimensions, presented in `Fourier Neural Operator for Parametric Partial
Differential Equation <https://openreview.net/pdf?id=c8P9NQVtmnO>`__.
First of all we import the modules needed for the tutorial. Importing
``scipy`` is needed for input output operations.

.. code:: ipython3

    ## routine needed to run the notebook on Google Colab
    try:
      import google.colab
      IN_COLAB = True
    except:
      IN_COLAB = False
    if IN_COLAB:
      !pip install "pina-mathlab"
      !pip install scipy
      
    # !pip install scipy  # install scipy
    from scipy import io
    import torch
    from pina.model import FNO, FeedForward  # let's import some models
    from pina import Condition, LabelTensor
    from pina.solvers import SupervisedSolver
    from pina.trainer import Trainer
    from pina.problem import AbstractProblem
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

Data Generation
---------------

We will focus on solving the a specfic PDE, the **Darcy Flow** equation.
The Darcy PDE is a second order, elliptic PDE with the following form:

.. math::


   -\nabla\cdot(k(x, y)\nabla u(x, y)) = f(x) \quad (x, y) \in D.

Specifically, :math:`u` is the flow pressure, :math:`k` is the
permeability field and :math:`f` is the forcing function. The Darcy flow
can parameterize a variety of systems including flow through porous
media, elastic materials and heat conduction. Here you will define the
domain as a 2D unit square Dirichlet boundary conditions. The dataset is
taken from the authors original reference.

.. code:: ipython3

    # download the dataset
    data = io.loadmat("Data_Darcy.mat")
    
    # extract data (we use only 100 data for train)
    k_train = LabelTensor(torch.tensor(data['k_train'], dtype=torch.float).unsqueeze(-1), ['u0'])
    u_train = LabelTensor(torch.tensor(data['u_train'], dtype=torch.float).unsqueeze(-1), ['u'])
    k_test =  LabelTensor(torch.tensor(data['k_test'], dtype=torch.float).unsqueeze(-1), ['u0'])
    u_test= LabelTensor(torch.tensor(data['u_test'], dtype=torch.float).unsqueeze(-1), ['u'])
    x = torch.tensor(data['x'], dtype=torch.float)[0]
    y = torch.tensor(data['y'], dtype=torch.float)[0]

Let’s visualize some data

.. code:: ipython3

    plt.subplot(1, 2, 1)
    plt.title('permeability')
    plt.imshow(k_train.squeeze(-1)[0])
    plt.subplot(1, 2, 2)
    plt.title('field solution')
    plt.imshow(u_train.squeeze(-1)[0])
    plt.show()



.. image:: tutorial_files/tutorial_6_0.png


We now create the neural operator class. It is a very simple class,
inheriting from ``AbstractProblem``.

.. code:: ipython3

    class NeuralOperatorSolver(AbstractProblem):
        input_variables = k_train.labels
        output_variables = u_train.labels
        conditions = {'data' : Condition(input_points=k_train, 
                                         output_points=u_train)}
    
    # make problem
    problem = NeuralOperatorSolver()

Solving the problem with a FeedForward Neural Network
-----------------------------------------------------

We will first solve the problem using a Feedforward neural network. We
will use the ``SupervisedSolver`` for solving the problem, since we are
training using supervised learning.

.. code:: ipython3

    # make model
    model = FeedForward(input_dimensions=1, output_dimensions=1)
    
    
    # make solver
    solver = SupervisedSolver(problem=problem, model=model)
    
    # make the trainer and train
    trainer = Trainer(solver=solver, max_epochs=10, accelerator='cpu', enable_model_summary=False, batch_size=10) # we train on CPU and avoid model summary at beginning of training (optional)
    trainer.train()



.. parsed-literal::

    GPU available: False, used: False
    TPU available: False, using: 0 TPU cores
    IPU available: False, using: 0 IPUs
    HPU available: False, using: 0 HPUs


.. parsed-literal::

    Epoch 9: : 100it [00:00, 357.28it/s, v_num=1, mean_loss=0.108]

.. parsed-literal::

    `Trainer.fit` stopped: `max_epochs=10` reached.


.. parsed-literal::

    Epoch 9: : 100it [00:00, 354.81it/s, v_num=1, mean_loss=0.108]


The final loss is pretty high… We can calculate the error by importing
``LpLoss``.

.. code:: ipython3

    from pina.loss import LpLoss
    
    # make the metric
    metric_err = LpLoss(relative=True)
    
    
    err = float(metric_err(u_train.squeeze(-1), solver.neural_net(k_train).squeeze(-1)).mean())*100
    print(f'Final error training {err:.2f}%')
    
    err = float(metric_err(u_test.squeeze(-1), solver.neural_net(k_test).squeeze(-1)).mean())*100
    print(f'Final error testing {err:.2f}%')


.. parsed-literal::

    Final error training 56.04%
    Final error testing 56.01%


Solving the problem with a Fuorier Neural Operator (FNO)
--------------------------------------------------------

We will now move to solve the problem using a FNO. Since we are learning
operator this approach is better suited, as we shall see.

.. code:: ipython3

    # make model
    lifting_net = torch.nn.Linear(1, 24)
    projecting_net = torch.nn.Linear(24, 1)
    model = FNO(lifting_net=lifting_net,
                projecting_net=projecting_net,
                n_modes=8,
                dimensions=2,
                inner_size=24,
                padding=8)
    
    
    # make solver
    solver = SupervisedSolver(problem=problem, model=model)
    
    # make the trainer and train
    trainer = Trainer(solver=solver, max_epochs=10, accelerator='cpu', enable_model_summary=False, batch_size=10) # we train on CPU and avoid model summary at beginning of training (optional)
    trainer.train()



.. parsed-literal::

    GPU available: False, used: False
    TPU available: False, using: 0 TPU cores
    IPU available: False, using: 0 IPUs
    HPU available: False, using: 0 HPUs


.. parsed-literal::

    Epoch 0: : 0it [00:00, ?it/s]Epoch 9: : 100it [00:02, 47.76it/s, v_num=4, mean_loss=0.00106] 

.. parsed-literal::

    `Trainer.fit` stopped: `max_epochs=10` reached.


.. parsed-literal::

    Epoch 9: : 100it [00:02, 47.65it/s, v_num=4, mean_loss=0.00106]


We can clearly see that the final loss is lower. Let’s see in testing..
Notice that the number of parameters is way higher than a
``FeedForward`` network. We suggest to use GPU or TPU for a speed up in
training, when many data samples are used.

.. code:: ipython3

    err = float(metric_err(u_train.squeeze(-1), solver.neural_net(k_train).squeeze(-1)).mean())*100
    print(f'Final error training {err:.2f}%')
    
    err = float(metric_err(u_test.squeeze(-1), solver.neural_net(k_test).squeeze(-1)).mean())*100
    print(f'Final error testing {err:.2f}%')


.. parsed-literal::

    Final error training 4.83%
    Final error testing 5.16%


As we can see the loss is way lower!

What’s next?
------------

We have made a very simple example on how to use the ``FNO`` for
learning neural operator. Currently in **PINA** we implement 1D/2D/3D
cases. We suggest to extend the tutorial using more complex problems and
train for longer, to see the full potential of neural operators.
