CHARTER.md, before:

# Charter for the PINA Organization

This is the organizational charter for the PINA Organization (the "Organization"). By adding their name to the [Steering Committee.md file](https://github.com/mathLab/PINA/blob/master/STEERING-COMMITTEE.md), Steering Committee members agree as follows.

## 1. Mission

The Organization mission is to advance open, accessible, and reliable computational tools that bridge mathematics, data, and real-world applications using Machine Learning. We strive to:

Empower researchers, educators, and practitioners with robust, transparent, and well-documented frameworks for scientific discovery.

Accelerate innovation by integrating classical mathematical methods with modern computational machine learning-based  techniques.

Promote collaboration and openness by maintaining a community-driven platform built on principles of reproducibility, interoperability, and long-term sustainability.

By pursuing these goals, the Organization aims to be a cornerstone resource in computational mathematics, supporting both theoretical advances and impactful applications across disciplines.


## 2. Steering Committee

**2.1 Purpose**. The Steering Committee will be responsible for all technical oversight, project approval and oversight, policy oversight, and trademark management for the Organization.

**2.2 Composition**. The Steering Committee voting members are listed in the [STEERING-COMMITEE.md](https://github.com/mathLab/PINA/blob/master/STEERING-COMMITTEE.md) file in the repository.
Voting members may be added or removed by no less than 75% affirmative vote of the Steering Committee.
The Steering Committee will appoint a Chair responsible for organizing Steering Committee activity.

## 3. Voting

**3.1. Decision Making**. The Steering Committee will strive for all decisions to be made by consensus. While explicit agreement of the entire Steering Committee is preferred, it is not required for consensus. Rather, the Steering Committee will determine consensus based on their good faith consideration of a number of factors, including the dominant view of the Steering Committee and nature of support and objections. The Steering Committee will document evidence of consensus in accordance with these requirements. If consensus cannot be reached, the Steering Committee will make the decision by a vote.

**3.2. Voting**. The Steering Committee Chair will call a vote with reasonable notice to the Steering Committee, setting out a discussion period and a separate voting period. Any discussion may be conducted in person or electronically by text, voice, or video. The discussion will be open to the public. In any vote, each voting representative will have one vote. Except as specifically noted elsewhere in this Charter, decisions by vote require a simple majority vote of all voting members.

## 4. Termination of Membership

In addition to the method set out in section 2.2, the membership of a Steering Committee member will terminate if any of the following occur:

**4.1 Resignation**. Written notice of resignation to the Steering Committee.

**4.2 Unreachable Member**. If a member is unresponsive at its listed handle for more than three months the Steering Committee may vote to remove the member.

## 5. Trademarks

Any names, trademarks, service marks, logos, mascots, or similar indicators of source or origin and the goodwill associated with them arising out of the Organization's activities or Organization projects' activities (the "Marks"), are controlled by the Organization. Steering Committee members may only use the Marks in accordance with the Organization's [trademark policy](https://github.com/mathLab/PINA/blob/master/TRADEMARKS.md). If a Steering Committee member is terminated or removed from the Steering Committee, any rights the Steering Committee member may have in the Marks revert to the Organization.

## 6. Antitrust Policy

The Steering Committee is bound by the Organization's [antitrust policy](https://github.com/mathLab/PINA/blob/master/ANTITRUST.md).

## 7. No Confidentiality

Information disclosed in connection with any of the Organization's activities, including but not limited to meetings, Contributions, and submissions, is not confidential, regardless of any markings or statements to the contrary.

## 8. Project Criteria

In order to be eligible to be a Organization project, a project must:

* Be approved by the Steering Committee.
* Agree to follow the guidance and direction of the Steering Committee.
* Use only the following outbound licenses or agreements unless otherwise approved:
  - For code, a license on the Open Source Initiative's list of [Popular Licenses](https://opensource.org/licenses).
  - For data, a license on the Open Knowledge Foundation's list of [Recommended Conformant Licenses](http://opendefinition.org/licenses/).
  - For specifications, a community developed and maintained specification agreement, such the [Open Web Foundation Agreements](https://www.openwebfoundation.org/the-agreements) or [Community Specification Agreement](https://github.com/CommunitySpecification/1.0).
* Include and adhere to the Organization's policies, including the [trademark policy](https://github.com/mathLab/PINA/blob/master/TRADEMARKS.md), the [antitrust policy](https://github.com/mathLab/PINA/blob/master/ANTITRUST.md), and the [code of conduct](https://github.com/mathLab/PINA/blob/master/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).

## 9. Amendments

Amendments to this charter, the [antitrust policy](https://github.com/mathLab/PINA/blob/master/ANTITRUST.md), the [trademark policy](https://github.com/mathLab/PINA/blob/master/TRADEMARKS.md), or the [code of conduct](https://github.com/mathLab/PINA/blob/master/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md) may only be made with at least a 75% affirmative vote of the Steering Committee.

---
## Attribution
This file is adapted from the [Minimum Viable Governance][https://github.com/github/MVG],
homepage, Licensed under the [CC-BY 4.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

Commit message:

Clarify PINA Organization references in charter (#651)

CHARTER.md, after:

# Charter for the PINA Organization

This is the organizational charter for the PINA Organization. In this Charter and related documents, “PINA Organization” means the entity designated in this Charter as the governing body of the PINA project. At the time of writing, this is the PINA Steering Committee. If governance changes in the future, references to “PINA Organization” automatically refer to the successor entity named here without rewriting other policies. By adding their name to the [Steering Committee.md file](https://github.com/mathLab/PINA/blob/master/STEERING-COMMITTEE.md), Steering Committee members agree as follows.

## 1. Mission

PINA mission is to advance open, accessible, and reliable computational tools that bridge mathematics, data, and real-world applications using Machine Learning. We strive to:

Empower researchers, educators, and practitioners with robust, transparent, and well-documented frameworks for scientific discovery.

Accelerate innovation by integrating classical mathematical methods with modern computational machine learning-based  techniques.

Promote collaboration and openness by maintaining a community-driven platform built on principles of reproducibility, interoperability, and long-term sustainability.

By pursuing these goals, the Organization aims to be a cornerstone resource in computational mathematics, supporting both theoretical advances and impactful applications across disciplines.


## 2. Steering Committee

**2.1 Purpose**. The Steering Committee will be responsible for all technical oversight, project approval and oversight, policy oversight, and trademark management.

**2.2 Composition**. The Steering Committee voting members are listed in the [STEERING-COMMITEE.md](https://github.com/mathLab/PINA/blob/master/STEERING-COMMITTEE.md) file in the repository.
Voting members may be added or removed by no less than 75% affirmative vote of the Steering Committee.
The Steering Committee will appoint a Chair responsible for organizing Steering Committee activity.

## 3. Voting

**3.1. Decision Making**. The Steering Committee will strive for all decisions to be made by consensus. While explicit agreement of the entire Steering Committee is preferred, it is not required for consensus. Rather, the Steering Committee will determine consensus based on their good faith consideration of a number of factors, including the dominant view of the Steering Committee and nature of support and objections. The Steering Committee will document evidence of consensus in accordance with these requirements. If consensus cannot be reached, the Steering Committee will make the decision by a vote.

**3.2. Voting**. The Steering Committee Chair will call a vote with reasonable notice to the Steering Committee, setting out a discussion period and a separate voting period. Any discussion may be conducted in person or electronically by text, voice, or video. The discussion will be open to the public. In any vote, each voting representative will have one vote. Except as specifically noted elsewhere in this Charter, decisions by vote require a simple majority vote of all voting members.

## 4. Termination of Membership

In addition to the method set out in section 2.2, the membership of a Steering Committee member will terminate if any of the following occur:

**4.1 Resignation**. Written notice of resignation to the Steering Committee.

**4.2 Unreachable Member**. If a member is unresponsive at its listed handle for more than three months the Steering Committee may vote to remove the member.

## 5. Trademarks

Any names, trademarks, service marks, logos, mascots, or similar indicators of source or origin and the goodwill associated with them arising out of the PINA's activities or PINA projects' activities (the "Marks"), are controlled by the PINA Organization. PINA Marks may be only used in accordance with the [trademark policy](https://github.com/mathLab/PINA/blob/master/TRADEMARKS.md).

## 6. Antitrust Policy

The Steering Committee is bound by the [antitrust policy](https://github.com/mathLab/PINA/blob/master/ANTITRUST.md).

## 7. No Confidentiality

Information disclosed in connection with any of the PINA's activities, including but not limited to meetings, contributions, and submissions, is not confidential, regardless of any markings or statements to the contrary.

## 8. Project Criteria

In order to be eligible to be a PINA project, a project must:

* Be approved by the Steering Committee.
* Agree to follow the guidance and direction of the Steering Committee.
* Use only the following outbound licenses or agreements unless otherwise approved:
  - For code, a license on the Open Source Initiative's list of [Popular Licenses](https://opensource.org/licenses).
  - For data, a license on the Open Knowledge Foundation's list of [Recommended Conformant Licenses](http://opendefinition.org/licenses/).
  - For specifications, a community developed and maintained specification agreement, such the [Open Web Foundation Agreements](https://www.openwebfoundation.org/the-agreements) or [Community Specification Agreement](https://github.com/CommunitySpecification/1.0).
* Include and adhere to the PINA's policies, including the [trademark policy](https://github.com/mathLab/PINA/blob/master/TRADEMARKS.md), the [antitrust policy](https://github.com/mathLab/PINA/blob/master/ANTITRUST.md), and the [code of conduct](https://github.com/mathLab/PINA/blob/master/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).

## 9. Amendments

Amendments to this charter, the [antitrust policy](https://github.com/mathLab/PINA/blob/master/ANTITRUST.md), the [trademark policy](https://github.com/mathLab/PINA/blob/master/TRADEMARKS.md), or the [code of conduct](https://github.com/mathLab/PINA/blob/master/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md) may only be made with at least a 75% affirmative vote of the Steering Committee.

---
## Attribution
This file is adapted from the [Minimum Viable Governance][https://github.com/github/MVG],
homepage, Licensed under the [CC-BY 4.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
