docs/source/_rst/_tutorial.rst, before:

PINA Tutorials
==============

In this folder we collect useful tutorials in order to understand the principles and the potential of **PINA**.

Getting started with PINA
-------------------------
.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 3
   :titlesonly:

   Introduction to PINA for Physics Informed Neural Networks training <tutorials/tutorial1/tutorial.rst>
   Building custom geometries with PINA Location class <tutorials/tutorial6/tutorial.rst>

Physics Informed Neural Networks
--------------------------------
.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 3
   :titlesonly:

   Two dimensional Poisson problem using Extra Features Learning<tutorials/tutorial2/tutorial.rst>
   Two dimensional Wave problem with hard constraint<tutorials/tutorial3/tutorial.rst>
   Resolution of a 2D Poisson inverse problem<tutorials/tutorial7/tutorial.rst>
   Periodic Boundary Conditions for Helmotz Equation<tutorials/tutorial9/tutorial.rst>

Neural Operator Learning
------------------------
.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 3
   :titlesonly:

   Two dimensional Darcy flow using the Fourier Neural Operator<tutorials/tutorial5/tutorial.rst>
   Time dependent Kuramoto Sivashinsky equation using the Averaging Neural Operator<tutorials/tutorial10/tutorial.rst>

Supervised Learning
-------------------
.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 3
   :titlesonly:

   Unstructured convolutional autoencoder via continuous convolution<tutorials/tutorial4/tutorial.rst>
   POD-NN for reduced order modeling<tutorials/tutorial8/tutorial.rst>

Commit message:

* tutorial Trainer class * implementing deepcopy for AbstractProblem and LabelTensor to match Lightning Callbacks

docs/source/_rst/_tutorial.rst, after:

PINA Tutorials
==============

In this folder we collect useful tutorials in order to understand the principles and the potential of **PINA**.

Getting started with PINA
-------------------------
.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 3
   :titlesonly:

   Introduction to PINA for Physics Informed Neural Networks training <tutorials/tutorial1/tutorial.rst>
   PINA and PyTorch Lightning, training tips and visualizations <tutorials/tutorial11/tutorial.rst>
   Building custom geometries with PINA Location class <tutorials/tutorial6/tutorial.rst>

Physics Informed Neural Networks
--------------------------------
.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 3
   :titlesonly:

   Two dimensional Poisson problem using Extra Features Learning<tutorials/tutorial2/tutorial.rst>
   Two dimensional Wave problem with hard constraint<tutorials/tutorial3/tutorial.rst>
   Resolution of a 2D Poisson inverse problem<tutorials/tutorial7/tutorial.rst>
   Periodic Boundary Conditions for Helmotz Equation<tutorials/tutorial9/tutorial.rst>

Neural Operator Learning
------------------------
.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 3
   :titlesonly:

   Two dimensional Darcy flow using the Fourier Neural Operator<tutorials/tutorial5/tutorial.rst>
   Time dependent Kuramoto Sivashinsky equation using the Averaging Neural Operator<tutorials/tutorial10/tutorial.rst>

Supervised Learning
-------------------
.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 3
   :titlesonly:

   Unstructured convolutional autoencoder via continuous convolution<tutorials/tutorial4/tutorial.rst>
   POD-NN for reduced order modeling<tutorials/tutorial8/tutorial.rst>
