docs/source/_rst/tutorials/tutorial10/tutorial.rst, before:

Tutorial: Averaging Neural Operator for solving Kuramoto Sivashinsky equation
=============================================================================

In this tutorial we will build a Neural Operator using the
``AveragingNeuralOperator`` model and the ``SupervisedSolver``. At the
end of the tutorial you will be able to train a Neural Operator for
learning the operator of time dependent PDEs.

First of all, some useful imports. Note we use ``scipy`` for i/o
operations.

.. code:: ipython3

    import torch
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    from scipy import io
    from pina import Condition, LabelTensor
    from pina.problem import AbstractProblem
    from pina.model import AveragingNeuralOperator
    from pina.solvers import SupervisedSolver
    from pina.trainer import Trainer

Data Generation
---------------

We will focus on solving a specific PDE, the **Kuramoto Sivashinsky**
(KS) equation. The KS PDE is a fourth-order nonlinear PDE with the
following form:

.. math::


   \frac{\partial u}{\partial t}(x,t) = -u(x,t)\frac{\partial u}{\partial x}(x,t)- \frac{\partial^{4}u}{\partial x^{4}}(x,t) - \frac{\partial^{2}u}{\partial x^{2}}(x,t).

In the above :math:`x\in \Omega=[0, 64]` represents a spatial location,
:math:`t\in\mathbb{T}=[0,50]` the time and :math:`u(x, t)` is the value
of the function :math:`u:\Omega \times\mathbb{T}\in\mathbb{R}`. We
indicate with :math:`\mathbb{U}` a suitable space for :math:`u`, i.e. we
have that the solution :math:`u\in\mathbb{U}`.

We impose Dirichlet boundary conditions on the derivative of :math:`u`
on the border of the domain :math:`\partial \Omega`

.. math::


   \frac{\partial u}{\partial x}(x,t)=0 \quad \forall (x,t)\in \partial \Omega\times\mathbb{T}.
    

Initial conditions are sampled from a distribution over truncated
Fourier series with random coefficients
:math:`\{A_k, \ell_k, \phi_k\}_k` as

.. math::


       u(x,0) = \sum_{k=1}^N A_k \sin(2 \pi \ell_k x / L + \phi_k) \ ,

where :math:`A_k \in [-0.4, -0.3]`, :math:`\ell_k = 2`,
:math:`\phi_k = 2\pi \quad \forall k=1,\dots,N`.

We have already generated some data for differenti initial conditions,
and our objective will be to build a Neural Operator that, given
:math:`u(x, t)` will output :math:`u(x, t+\delta)`, where :math:`\delta`
is a fixed time step. We will come back on the Neural Operator
architecture, for now we first need to import the data.

**Note:** *The numerical integration is obtained by using pseudospectral
method for spatial derivative discratization and implicit Runge Kutta 5
for temporal dynamics.*

.. code:: ipython3

    # load data
    data=io.loadmat("dat/Data_KS.mat")
    
    # converting to label tensor
    initial_cond_train = LabelTensor(torch.tensor(data['initial_cond_train'], dtype=torch.float), ['t','x','u0'])
    initial_cond_test = LabelTensor(torch.tensor(data['initial_cond_test'], dtype=torch.float), ['t','x','u0'])
    sol_train = LabelTensor(torch.tensor(data['sol_train'], dtype=torch.float), ['u'])
    sol_test = LabelTensor(torch.tensor(data['sol_test'], dtype=torch.float), ['u'])
    
    print('Data Loaded')
    print(f' shape initial condition: {initial_cond_train.shape}')
    print(f' shape solution: {sol_train.shape}')


.. parsed-literal::

    Data Loaded
     shape initial condition: torch.Size([100, 12800, 3])
     shape solution: torch.Size([100, 12800, 1])


The data are saved in the form ``B \times N \times D``, where ``B`` is
the batch_size (basically how many initial conditions we sample), ``N``
the number of points in the mesh (which is the product of the
discretization in ``x`` timese the one in ``t``), and ``D`` the
dimension of the problem (in this case we have three variables
``[u, t, x]``).

We are now going to plot some trajectories!

.. code:: ipython3

    # helper function
    def plot_trajectory(coords, real, no_sol=None):
        # find the x-t shapes
        dim_x = len(torch.unique(coords.extract('x')))
        dim_t = len(torch.unique(coords.extract('t')))
        # if we don't have the Neural Operator solution we simply plot the real one
        if no_sol is None:
            fig, axs = plt.subplots(1, 1, figsize=(15, 5), sharex=True, sharey=True)
            c = axs.imshow(real.reshape(dim_t, dim_x).T.detach(),extent=[0, 50, 0, 64], cmap='PuOr_r', aspect='auto')
            axs.set_title('Real solution')
            fig.colorbar(c, ax=axs)
            axs.set_xlabel('t')
            axs.set_ylabel('x')
        # otherwise we plot the real one, the Neural Operator one, and their difference
        else:
            fig, axs = plt.subplots(1, 3, figsize=(15, 5), sharex=True, sharey=True)
            axs[0].imshow(real.reshape(dim_t, dim_x).T.detach(),extent=[0, 50, 0, 64], cmap='PuOr_r', aspect='auto')
            axs[0].set_title('Real solution')
            axs[1].imshow(no_sol.reshape(dim_t, dim_x).T.detach(),extent=[0, 50, 0, 64], cmap='PuOr_r', aspect='auto')
            axs[1].set_title('NO solution')
            c = axs[2].imshow((real - no_sol).abs().reshape(dim_t, dim_x).T.detach(),extent=[0, 50, 0, 64], cmap='PuOr_r', aspect='auto')
            axs[2].set_title('Absolute difference')
            fig.colorbar(c, ax=axs.ravel().tolist())
            for ax in axs:
                ax.set_xlabel('t')
                ax.set_ylabel('x')
        plt.show()
    
    # a sample trajectory (we use the sample 5, feel free to change)
    sample_number = 20
    plot_trajectory(coords=initial_cond_train[sample_number].extract(['x', 't']),
                    real=sol_train[sample_number].extract('u'))




.. image:: tutorial_files/tutorial_5_0.png


As we can see, as the time progresses the solution becomes chaotic,
which makes it really hard to learn! We will now focus on building a
Neural Operator using the ``SupervisedSolver`` class to tackle the
problem.

Averaging Neural Operator
-------------------------

We will build a neural operator :math:`\texttt{NO}` which takes the
solution at time :math:`t=0` for any :math:`x\in\Omega`, the time
:math:`(t)` at which we want to compute the solution, and gives back the
solution to the KS equation :math:`u(x, t)`, mathematically:

.. math::


   \texttt{NO}_\theta : \mathbb{U} \rightarrow  \mathbb{U},

such that

.. math::


   \texttt{NO}_\theta[u(t=0)](x, t) \rightarrow  u(x, t).

There are many ways on approximating the following operator, e.g. by 2D
`FNO <https://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/models/fno.html>`__ (for
regular meshes), a
`DeepOnet <https://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/models/deeponet.html>`__,
`Continuous Convolutional Neural
Operator <https://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/layers/convolution.html>`__,
`MIONet <https://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/models/mionet.html>`__. In
this tutorial we will use the *Averaging Neural Operator* presented in
`The Nonlocal Neural Operator: Universal
Approximation <https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.13221>`__ which is a `Kernel
Neural
Operator <https://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/models/base_no.html>`__
with integral kernel:

.. math::


   K(v) = \sigma\left(Wv(x) + b + \frac{1}{|\Omega|}\int_\Omega v(y)dy\right)

where:

-  :math:`v(x)\in\mathbb{R}^{\rm{emb}}` is the update for a function
   :math:`v` with :math:`\mathbb{R}^{\rm{emb}}` the embedding (hidden)
   size
-  :math:`\sigma` is a non-linear activation
-  :math:`W\in\mathbb{R}^{\rm{emb}\times\rm{emb}}` is a tunable matrix.
-  :math:`b\in\mathbb{R}^{\rm{emb}}` is a tunable bias.

If PINA many Kernel Neural Operators are already implemented, and the
modular componets of the `Kernel Neural
Operator <https://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/models/base_no.html>`__
class permits to create new ones by composing base kernel layers.

**Note:**\ \* We will use the already built class\*
``AveragingNeuralOperator``, *as constructive excercise try to use the*
`KernelNeuralOperator <https://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/models/base_no.html>`__
*class for building a kernel neural operator from scratch. You might
employ the different layers that we have in pina, e.g.*
`FeedForward <https://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/models/fnn.html>`__,
*and*
`AveragingNeuralOperator <https://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/layers/avno_layer.html>`__
*layers*.

.. code:: ipython3

    class SIREN(torch.nn.Module):
        def forward(self, x):
            return torch.sin(x)
        
    embedding_dimesion = 40     # hyperparameter embedding dimension
    input_dimension = 3         # ['u', 'x', 't']
    number_of_coordinates = 2   # ['x', 't']
    lifting_net = torch.nn.Linear(input_dimension, embedding_dimesion)   # simple linear layers for lifting and projecting nets
    projecting_net = torch.nn.Linear(embedding_dimesion + number_of_coordinates, 1)
    model = AveragingNeuralOperator(lifting_net=lifting_net,
                                    projecting_net=projecting_net,
                                    coordinates_indices=['x', 't'],
                                    field_indices=['u0'],
                                    n_layers=4,
                                    func=SIREN
                                    ) 

Super easy! Notice that we use the ``SIREN`` activation function, more
on `Implicit Neural Representations with Periodic Activation
Functions <https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.09661>`__.

Solving the KS problem
----------------------

We will now focus on solving the KS equation using the
``SupervisedSolver`` class and the ``AveragingNeuralOperator`` model. As
done in the `FNO
tutorial <https://github.com/mathLab/PINA/blob/master/tutorials/tutorial5/tutorial.ipynb>`__
we now create the ``NeuralOperatorProblem`` class with
``AbstractProblem``.

.. code:: ipython3

    # expected running time ~ 1 minute
    
    class NeuralOperatorProblem(AbstractProblem):
        input_variables = initial_cond_train.labels
        output_variables = sol_train.labels
        conditions = {'data' : Condition(input_points=initial_cond_train, 
                                         output_points=sol_train)}
    
    
    # initialize problem
    problem = NeuralOperatorProblem()
    # initialize solver
    solver = SupervisedSolver(problem=problem, model=model,optimizer_kwargs={"lr":0.001})
    # train, only CPU and avoid model summary at beginning of training (optional)
    trainer = Trainer(solver=solver, max_epochs=40, accelerator='cpu', enable_model_summary=False, log_every_n_steps=-1, batch_size=5) # we train on CPU and avoid model summary at beginning of training (optional)
    trainer.train()



.. parsed-literal::

    GPU available: True (mps), used: False
    TPU available: False, using: 0 TPU cores
    IPU available: False, using: 0 IPUs
    HPU available: False, using: 0 HPUs


.. parsed-literal::

    Epoch 39: 100%|██████████| 20/20 [00:01<00:00, 13.59it/s, v_num=3, mean_loss=0.118]

.. parsed-literal::

    `Trainer.fit` stopped: `max_epochs=40` reached.


.. parsed-literal::

    Epoch 39: 100%|██████████| 20/20 [00:01<00:00, 13.56it/s, v_num=3, mean_loss=0.118]


We can now see some plots for the solutions

.. code:: ipython3

    sample_number = 2
    no_sol = solver(initial_cond_test)
    plot_trajectory(coords=initial_cond_test[sample_number].extract(['x', 't']),
                    real=sol_test[sample_number].extract('u'),
                    no_sol=no_sol[5])



.. image:: tutorial_files/tutorial_11_0.png


As we can see we can obtain nice result considering the small trainint
time and the difficulty of the problem! Let’s see how the training and
testing error:

.. code:: ipython3

    from pina.loss import PowerLoss
    
    error_metric = PowerLoss(p=2)                                                   # we use the MSE loss
    
    with torch.no_grad():
        no_sol_train = solver(initial_cond_train)
        err_train = error_metric(sol_train.extract('u'), no_sol_train).mean()       # we average the error over trajectories
        no_sol_test = solver(initial_cond_test)
        err_test = error_metric(sol_test.extract('u'),no_sol_test).mean()           # we average the error over trajectories
        print(f'Training error: {float(err_train):.3f}')
        print(f'Testing error: {float(err_test):.3f}')


.. parsed-literal::

    Training error: 0.128
    Testing error: 0.119


as we can see the error is pretty small, which agrees with what we can
see from the previous plots.

What’s next?
------------

Now you know how to solve a time dependent neural operator problem in
**PINA**! There are multiple directions you can go now:

1. Train the network for longer or with different layer sizes and assert
   the finaly accuracy

2. We left a more challenging dataset
   `Data_KS2.mat <https://github.com/mathLab/PINA/tree/master/tutorials/tutorial10/Data_KS2.mat>`__ where
   :math:`A_k \in [-0.5, 0.5]`, :math:`\ell_k \in [1, 2, 3]`,
   :math:`\phi_k \in [0, 2\pi]` for loger training

3. Compare the performance between the different neural operators (you
   can even try to implement your favourite one!)

Commit message:

Colab tutorials (#367)
* Colab Button & Run added

docs/source/_rst/tutorials/tutorial10/tutorial.rst, after:

Tutorial: Averaging Neural Operator for solving Kuramoto Sivashinsky equation
=============================================================================

|Open In Colab|

.. |Open In Colab| image:: https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg
   :target: https://colab.research.google.com/github/mathLab/PINA/blob/master/tutorials/tutorial10/tutorial.ipynb

In this tutorial we will build a Neural Operator using the
``AveragingNeuralOperator`` model and the ``SupervisedSolver``. At the
end of the tutorial you will be able to train a Neural Operator for
learning the operator of time dependent PDEs.

First of all, some useful imports. Note we use ``scipy`` for i/o
operations.

.. code:: ipython3

    ## routine needed to run the notebook on Google Colab
    try:
      import google.colab
      IN_COLAB = True
    except:
      IN_COLAB = False
    if IN_COLAB:
      !pip install "pina-mathlab"
    
    import torch
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    from scipy import io
    from pina import Condition, LabelTensor
    from pina.problem import AbstractProblem
    from pina.model import AveragingNeuralOperator
    from pina.solvers import SupervisedSolver
    from pina.trainer import Trainer

Data Generation
---------------

We will focus on solving a specific PDE, the **Kuramoto Sivashinsky**
(KS) equation. The KS PDE is a fourth-order nonlinear PDE with the
following form:

.. math::


   \frac{\partial u}{\partial t}(x,t) = -u(x,t)\frac{\partial u}{\partial x}(x,t)- \frac{\partial^{4}u}{\partial x^{4}}(x,t) - \frac{\partial^{2}u}{\partial x^{2}}(x,t).

In the above :math:`x\in \Omega=[0, 64]` represents a spatial location,
:math:`t\in\mathbb{T}=[0,50]` the time and :math:`u(x, t)` is the value
of the function :math:`u:\Omega \times\mathbb{T}\in\mathbb{R}`. We
indicate with :math:`\mathbb{U}` a suitable space for :math:`u`, i.e. we
have that the solution :math:`u\in\mathbb{U}`.

We impose Dirichlet boundary conditions on the derivative of :math:`u`
on the border of the domain :math:`\partial \Omega`

.. math::


   \frac{\partial u}{\partial x}(x,t)=0 \quad \forall (x,t)\in \partial \Omega\times\mathbb{T}.
    

Initial conditions are sampled from a distribution over truncated
Fourier series with random coefficients
:math:`\{A_k, \ell_k, \phi_k\}_k` as

.. math::


       u(x,0) = \sum_{k=1}^N A_k \sin(2 \pi \ell_k x / L + \phi_k) \ ,

where :math:`A_k \in [-0.4, -0.3]`, :math:`\ell_k = 2`,
:math:`\phi_k = 2\pi \quad \forall k=1,\dots,N`.

We have already generated some data for differenti initial conditions,
and our objective will be to build a Neural Operator that, given
:math:`u(x, t)` will output :math:`u(x, t+\delta)`, where :math:`\delta`
is a fixed time step. We will come back on the Neural Operator
architecture, for now we first need to import the data.

**Note:** *The numerical integration is obtained by using pseudospectral
method for spatial derivative discratization and implicit Runge Kutta 5
for temporal dynamics.*

.. code:: ipython3

    # load data
    data=io.loadmat("dat/Data_KS.mat")
    
    # converting to label tensor
    initial_cond_train = LabelTensor(torch.tensor(data['initial_cond_train'], dtype=torch.float), ['t','x','u0'])
    initial_cond_test = LabelTensor(torch.tensor(data['initial_cond_test'], dtype=torch.float), ['t','x','u0'])
    sol_train = LabelTensor(torch.tensor(data['sol_train'], dtype=torch.float), ['u'])
    sol_test = LabelTensor(torch.tensor(data['sol_test'], dtype=torch.float), ['u'])
    
    print('Data Loaded')
    print(f' shape initial condition: {initial_cond_train.shape}')
    print(f' shape solution: {sol_train.shape}')


.. parsed-literal::

    Data Loaded
     shape initial condition: torch.Size([100, 12800, 3])
     shape solution: torch.Size([100, 12800, 1])


The data are saved in the form ``B \times N \times D``, where ``B`` is
the batch_size (basically how many initial conditions we sample), ``N``
the number of points in the mesh (which is the product of the
discretization in ``x`` timese the one in ``t``), and ``D`` the
dimension of the problem (in this case we have three variables
``[u, t, x]``).

We are now going to plot some trajectories!

.. code:: ipython3

    # helper function
    def plot_trajectory(coords, real, no_sol=None):
        # find the x-t shapes
        dim_x = len(torch.unique(coords.extract('x')))
        dim_t = len(torch.unique(coords.extract('t')))
        # if we don't have the Neural Operator solution we simply plot the real one
        if no_sol is None:
            fig, axs = plt.subplots(1, 1, figsize=(15, 5), sharex=True, sharey=True)
            c = axs.imshow(real.reshape(dim_t, dim_x).T.detach(),extent=[0, 50, 0, 64], cmap='PuOr_r', aspect='auto')
            axs.set_title('Real solution')
            fig.colorbar(c, ax=axs)
            axs.set_xlabel('t')
            axs.set_ylabel('x')
        # otherwise we plot the real one, the Neural Operator one, and their difference
        else:
            fig, axs = plt.subplots(1, 3, figsize=(15, 5), sharex=True, sharey=True)
            axs[0].imshow(real.reshape(dim_t, dim_x).T.detach(),extent=[0, 50, 0, 64], cmap='PuOr_r', aspect='auto')
            axs[0].set_title('Real solution')
            axs[1].imshow(no_sol.reshape(dim_t, dim_x).T.detach(),extent=[0, 50, 0, 64], cmap='PuOr_r', aspect='auto')
            axs[1].set_title('NO solution')
            c = axs[2].imshow((real - no_sol).abs().reshape(dim_t, dim_x).T.detach(),extent=[0, 50, 0, 64], cmap='PuOr_r', aspect='auto')
            axs[2].set_title('Absolute difference')
            fig.colorbar(c, ax=axs.ravel().tolist())
            for ax in axs:
                ax.set_xlabel('t')
                ax.set_ylabel('x')
        plt.show()
    
    # a sample trajectory (we use the sample 5, feel free to change)
    sample_number = 20
    plot_trajectory(coords=initial_cond_train[sample_number].extract(['x', 't']),
                    real=sol_train[sample_number].extract('u'))




.. image:: tutorial_files/tutorial_5_0.png


As we can see, as the time progresses the solution becomes chaotic,
which makes it really hard to learn! We will now focus on building a
Neural Operator using the ``SupervisedSolver`` class to tackle the
problem.

Averaging Neural Operator
-------------------------

We will build a neural operator :math:`\texttt{NO}` which takes the
solution at time :math:`t=0` for any :math:`x\in\Omega`, the time
:math:`(t)` at which we want to compute the solution, and gives back the
solution to the KS equation :math:`u(x, t)`, mathematically:

.. math::


   \texttt{NO}_\theta : \mathbb{U} \rightarrow  \mathbb{U},

such that

.. math::


   \texttt{NO}_\theta[u(t=0)](x, t) \rightarrow  u(x, t).

There are many ways on approximating the following operator, e.g. by 2D
`FNO <https://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/models/fno.html>`__ (for
regular meshes), a
`DeepOnet <https://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/models/deeponet.html>`__,
`Continuous Convolutional Neural
Operator <https://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/layers/convolution.html>`__,
`MIONet <https://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/models/mionet.html>`__. In
this tutorial we will use the *Averaging Neural Operator* presented in
`The Nonlocal Neural Operator: Universal
Approximation <https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.13221>`__ which is a `Kernel
Neural
Operator <https://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/models/base_no.html>`__
with integral kernel:

.. math::


   K(v) = \sigma\left(Wv(x) + b + \frac{1}{|\Omega|}\int_\Omega v(y)dy\right)

where:

-  :math:`v(x)\in\mathbb{R}^{\rm{emb}}` is the update for a function
   :math:`v` with :math:`\mathbb{R}^{\rm{emb}}` the embedding (hidden)
   size
-  :math:`\sigma` is a non-linear activation
-  :math:`W\in\mathbb{R}^{\rm{emb}\times\rm{emb}}` is a tunable matrix.
-  :math:`b\in\mathbb{R}^{\rm{emb}}` is a tunable bias.

If PINA many Kernel Neural Operators are already implemented, and the
modular componets of the `Kernel Neural
Operator <https://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/models/base_no.html>`__
class permits to create new ones by composing base kernel layers.

**Note:**\ \* We will use the already built class\*
``AveragingNeuralOperator``, *as constructive excercise try to use the*
`KernelNeuralOperator <https://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/models/base_no.html>`__
*class for building a kernel neural operator from scratch. You might
employ the different layers that we have in pina, e.g.*
`FeedForward <https://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/models/fnn.html>`__,
*and*
`AveragingNeuralOperator <https://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/layers/avno_layer.html>`__
*layers*.

.. code:: ipython3

    class SIREN(torch.nn.Module):
        def forward(self, x):
            return torch.sin(x)
        
    embedding_dimesion = 40     # hyperparameter embedding dimension
    input_dimension = 3         # ['u', 'x', 't']
    number_of_coordinates = 2   # ['x', 't']
    lifting_net = torch.nn.Linear(input_dimension, embedding_dimesion)   # simple linear layers for lifting and projecting nets
    projecting_net = torch.nn.Linear(embedding_dimesion + number_of_coordinates, 1)
    model = AveragingNeuralOperator(lifting_net=lifting_net,
                                    projecting_net=projecting_net,
                                    coordinates_indices=['x', 't'],
                                    field_indices=['u0'],
                                    n_layers=4,
                                    func=SIREN
                                    ) 

Super easy! Notice that we use the ``SIREN`` activation function, more
on `Implicit Neural Representations with Periodic Activation
Functions <https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.09661>`__.

Solving the KS problem
----------------------

We will now focus on solving the KS equation using the
``SupervisedSolver`` class and the ``AveragingNeuralOperator`` model. As
done in the `FNO
tutorial <https://github.com/mathLab/PINA/blob/master/tutorials/tutorial5/tutorial.ipynb>`__
we now create the ``NeuralOperatorProblem`` class with
``AbstractProblem``.

.. code:: ipython3

    # expected running time ~ 1 minute
    
    class NeuralOperatorProblem(AbstractProblem):
        input_variables = initial_cond_train.labels
        output_variables = sol_train.labels
        conditions = {'data' : Condition(input_points=initial_cond_train, 
                                         output_points=sol_train)}
    
    
    # initialize problem
    problem = NeuralOperatorProblem()
    # initialize solver
    solver = SupervisedSolver(problem=problem, model=model,optimizer_kwargs={"lr":0.001})
    # train, only CPU and avoid model summary at beginning of training (optional)
    trainer = Trainer(solver=solver, max_epochs=40, accelerator='cpu', enable_model_summary=False, log_every_n_steps=-1, batch_size=5) # we train on CPU and avoid model summary at beginning of training (optional)
    trainer.train()



.. parsed-literal::

    GPU available: True (mps), used: False
    TPU available: False, using: 0 TPU cores
    IPU available: False, using: 0 IPUs
    HPU available: False, using: 0 HPUs


.. parsed-literal::

    Epoch 39: 100%|██████████| 20/20 [00:01<00:00, 13.59it/s, v_num=3, mean_loss=0.118]

.. parsed-literal::

    `Trainer.fit` stopped: `max_epochs=40` reached.


.. parsed-literal::

    Epoch 39: 100%|██████████| 20/20 [00:01<00:00, 13.56it/s, v_num=3, mean_loss=0.118]


We can now see some plots for the solutions

.. code:: ipython3

    sample_number = 2
    no_sol = solver(initial_cond_test)
    plot_trajectory(coords=initial_cond_test[sample_number].extract(['x', 't']),
                    real=sol_test[sample_number].extract('u'),
                    no_sol=no_sol[5])



.. image:: tutorial_files/tutorial_11_0.png


As we can see we can obtain nice result considering the small trainint
time and the difficulty of the problem! Let’s see how the training and
testing error:

.. code:: ipython3

    from pina.loss import PowerLoss
    
    error_metric = PowerLoss(p=2)                                                   # we use the MSE loss
    
    with torch.no_grad():
        no_sol_train = solver(initial_cond_train)
        err_train = error_metric(sol_train.extract('u'), no_sol_train).mean()       # we average the error over trajectories
        no_sol_test = solver(initial_cond_test)
        err_test = error_metric(sol_test.extract('u'),no_sol_test).mean()           # we average the error over trajectories
        print(f'Training error: {float(err_train):.3f}')
        print(f'Testing error: {float(err_test):.3f}')


.. parsed-literal::

    Training error: 0.128
    Testing error: 0.119


as we can see the error is pretty small, which agrees with what we can
see from the previous plots.

What’s next?
------------

Now you know how to solve a time dependent neural operator problem in
**PINA**! There are multiple directions you can go now:

1. Train the network for longer or with different layer sizes and assert
   the finaly accuracy

2. We left a more challenging dataset
   `Data_KS2.mat <https://github.com/mathLab/PINA/tree/master/tutorials/tutorial10/Data_KS2.mat>`__ where
   :math:`A_k \in [-0.5, 0.5]`, :math:`\ell_k \in [1, 2, 3]`,
   :math:`\phi_k \in [0, 2\pi]` for loger training

3. Compare the performance between the different neural operators (you
   can even try to implement your favourite one!)
