tutorials/README.md, before:

# PINA Tutorials

In this folder we collect useful tutorials in order to understand the principles and the potential of **PINA**. Please read the following table for details about the tutorials. The HTML version of all the tutorials is available also within the [documentation](http://mathlab.github.io/PINA/).

## Getting started with PINA

| Description   | Tutorial |
|---------------|-----------|
Introduction to PINA for Physics Informed Neural Networks training|[[.ipynb](tutorial1/tutorial.ipynb),&#160;[.py](tutorial1/tutorial.py),&#160;[.html](http://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/tutorials/tutorial1/tutorial.html)]|
Building custom geometries with PINA `Location` class|[[.ipynb](tutorial6/tutorial.ipynb),&#160;[.py](tutorial6/tutorial.py),&#160;[.html](http://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/tutorials/tutorial6/tutorial.html)]|


## Physics Informed Neural Networks
| Description   | Tutorial  |
|---------------|-----------|
Two dimensional Poisson problem using Extra Features Learning &nbsp; &nbsp; |[[.ipynb](tutorial2/tutorial.ipynb),&#160;[.py](tutorial2/tutorial.py),&#160;[.html](http://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/tutorials/tutorial2/tutorial.html)]|
Two dimensional Wave problem with hard constraint |[[.ipynb](tutorial3/tutorial.ipynb),&#160;[.py](tutorial3/tutorial.py),&#160;[.html](http://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/tutorials/tutorial3/tutorial.html)]|
Resolution of a 2D Poisson inverse problem |[[.ipynb](tutorial7/tutorial.ipynb),&#160;[.py](tutorial7/tutorial.py),&#160;[.html](http://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/tutorials/tutorial7/tutorial.html)]|
Periodic Boundary Conditions for Helmotz Equation |[[.ipynb](tutorial9/tutorial.ipynb),&#160;[.py](tutorial9/tutorial.py),&#160;[.html](http://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/tutorials/tutorial9/tutorial.html)]|

## Neural Operator Learning
| Description   | Tutorial  |
|---------------|-----------|
Two dimensional Darcy flow using the Fourier Neural Operator  &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;|[[.ipynb](tutorial5/tutorial.ipynb),&#160;[.py](tutorial5/tutorial.py),&#160;[.html](http://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/tutorials/tutorial5/tutorial.html)]|
Time dependent Kuramoto Sivashinsky equation using the Averaging Neural Operator  &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;|[[.ipynb](tutorial10/tutorial.ipynb),&#160;[.py](tutorial10/tutorial.py),&#160;[.html](http://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/tutorials/tutorial10/tutorial.html)]|

## Supervised Learning
| Description   | Tutorial  |
|---------------|-----------|
Unstructured convolutional autoencoder via continuous convolution |[[.ipynb](tutorial4/tutorial.ipynb),&#160;[.py](tutorial4/tutorial.py),&#160;[.html](http://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/tutorials/tutorial4/tutorial.html)]|
POD-NN for reduced order modeling| [[.ipynb](tutorial8/tutorial.ipynb),&#160;[.py](tutorial8/tutorial.py),&#160;[.html](http://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/tutorials/tutorial8/tutorial.html)]|

Commit message:

* tutorial Trainer class * implementing deepcopy for AbstractProblem and LabelTensor to match Lightning Callbacks

tutorials/README.md, after:

# PINA Tutorials

In this folder we collect useful tutorials in order to understand the principles and the potential of **PINA**. Please read the following table for details about the tutorials. The HTML version of all the tutorials is available also within the [documentation](http://mathlab.github.io/PINA/).

## Getting started with PINA

| Description   | Tutorial |
|---------------|-----------|
Introduction to PINA for Physics Informed Neural Networks training|[[.ipynb](tutorial1/tutorial.ipynb),&#160;[.py](tutorial1/tutorial.py),&#160;[.html](http://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/tutorials/tutorial1/tutorial.html)]|
PINA and PyTorch Lightning, training tips and visualizations|[[.ipynb](tutorial11/tutorial.ipynb),&#160;[.py](tutorial11/tutorial.py),&#160;[.html](http://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/tutorials/tutorial11/tutorial.html)]|
Building custom geometries with PINA `Location` class|[[.ipynb](tutorial6/tutorial.ipynb),&#160;[.py](tutorial6/tutorial.py),&#160;[.html](http://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/tutorials/tutorial6/tutorial.html)]|


## Physics Informed Neural Networks
| Description   | Tutorial  |
|---------------|-----------|
Two dimensional Poisson problem using Extra Features Learning &nbsp; &nbsp; |[[.ipynb](tutorial2/tutorial.ipynb),&#160;[.py](tutorial2/tutorial.py),&#160;[.html](http://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/tutorials/tutorial2/tutorial.html)]|
Two dimensional Wave problem with hard constraint |[[.ipynb](tutorial3/tutorial.ipynb),&#160;[.py](tutorial3/tutorial.py),&#160;[.html](http://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/tutorials/tutorial3/tutorial.html)]|
Resolution of a 2D Poisson inverse problem |[[.ipynb](tutorial7/tutorial.ipynb),&#160;[.py](tutorial7/tutorial.py),&#160;[.html](http://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/tutorials/tutorial7/tutorial.html)]|
Periodic Boundary Conditions for Helmotz Equation |[[.ipynb](tutorial9/tutorial.ipynb),&#160;[.py](tutorial9/tutorial.py),&#160;[.html](http://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/tutorials/tutorial9/tutorial.html)]|

## Neural Operator Learning
| Description   | Tutorial  |
|---------------|-----------|
Two dimensional Darcy flow using the Fourier Neural Operator  &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;|[[.ipynb](tutorial5/tutorial.ipynb),&#160;[.py](tutorial5/tutorial.py),&#160;[.html](http://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/tutorials/tutorial5/tutorial.html)]|
Time dependent Kuramoto Sivashinsky equation using the Averaging Neural Operator  &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;|[[.ipynb](tutorial10/tutorial.ipynb),&#160;[.py](tutorial10/tutorial.py),&#160;[.html](http://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/tutorials/tutorial10/tutorial.html)]|

## Supervised Learning
| Description   | Tutorial  |
|---------------|-----------|
Unstructured convolutional autoencoder via continuous convolution |[[.ipynb](tutorial4/tutorial.ipynb),&#160;[.py](tutorial4/tutorial.py),&#160;[.html](http://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/tutorials/tutorial4/tutorial.html)]|
POD-NN for reduced order modeling| [[.ipynb](tutorial8/tutorial.ipynb),&#160;[.py](tutorial8/tutorial.py),&#160;[.html](http://mathlab.github.io/PINA/_rst/tutorials/tutorial8/tutorial.html)]|
