docs/source/_rst/tutorials/tutorial8/tutorial.rst, before:

Tutorial: Reduced order model (POD-RBF or POD-NN) for parametric problems
=========================================================================

The tutorial aims to show how to employ the **PINA** library in order to
apply a reduced order modeling technique [1]. Such methodologies have
several similarities with machine learning approaches, since the main
goal consists in predicting the solution of differential equations
(typically parametric PDEs) in a real-time fashion.

In particular we are going to use the Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
with either Radial Basis Function Interpolation(POD-RBF) or Neural
Network (POD-NN) [2]. Here we basically perform a dimensional reduction
using the POD approach, and approximating the parametric solution
manifold (at the reduced space) using an interpolation (RBF) or a
regression technique (NN). In this example, we use a simple multilayer
perceptron, but the plenty of different architectures can be plugged as
well.

References
^^^^^^^^^^

1. Rozza G., Stabile G., Ballarin F. (2022). Advanced Reduced Order
   Methods and Applications in Computational Fluid Dynamics, Society for
   Industrial and Applied Mathematics.
2. Hesthaven, J. S., & Ubbiali, S. (2018). Non-intrusive reduced order
   modeling of nonlinear problems using neural networks. Journal of
   Computational Physics, 363, 55-78.

Let’s start with the necessary imports. It’s important to note the
minimum PINA version to run this tutorial is the ``0.1``.

.. code:: ipython3

    %matplotlib inline

    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    import torch
    import pina

    from pina.geometry import CartesianDomain

    from pina.problem import ParametricProblem
    from pina.model.layers import PODBlock, RBFBlock
    from pina import Condition, LabelTensor, Trainer
    from pina.model import FeedForward
    from pina.solvers import SupervisedSolver

    print(f'We are using PINA version {pina.__version__}')


.. parsed-literal::

    We are using PINA version 0.1.1


We exploit the `Smithers <www.github.com/mathLab/Smithers>`__ library to
collect the parametric snapshots. In particular, we use the
``NavierStokesDataset`` class that contains a set of parametric
solutions of the Navier-Stokes equations in a 2D L-shape domain. The
parameter is the inflow velocity. The dataset is composed by 500
snapshots of the velocity (along :math:`x`, :math:`y`, and the
magnitude) and pressure fields, and the corresponding parameter values.

To visually check the snapshots, let’s plot also the data points and the
reference solution: this is the expected output of our model.

.. code:: ipython3

    from smithers.dataset import NavierStokesDataset
    dataset = NavierStokesDataset()

    fig, axs = plt.subplots(1, 4, figsize=(14, 3))
    for ax, p, u in zip(axs, dataset.params[:4], dataset.snapshots['mag(v)'][:4]):
        ax.tricontourf(dataset.triang, u, levels=16)
        ax.set_title(f'$\mu$ = {p[0]:.2f}')



.. image:: tutorial_files/tutorial_5_0.png


The *snapshots* - aka the numerical solutions computed for several
parameters - and the corresponding parameters are the only data we need
to train the model, in order to predict the solution for any new test
parameter. To properly validate the accuracy, we initially split the 500
snapshots into the training dataset (90% of the original data) and the
testing one (the reamining 10%). It must be said that, to plug the
snapshots into **PINA**, we have to cast them to ``LabelTensor``
objects.

.. code:: ipython3

    u = torch.tensor(dataset.snapshots['mag(v)']).float()
    p = torch.tensor(dataset.params).float()

    p = LabelTensor(p, labels=['mu'])
    u = LabelTensor(u, labels=[f's{i}' for i in range(u.shape[1])])

    ratio_train_test = 0.9
    n = u.shape
    n_train = int(u.shape[0] * ratio_train_test)
    n_test = u - n_train
    u_train, u_test = u[:n_train], u[n_train:]
    p_train, p_test = p[:n_train], p[n_train:]

It is now time to define the problem! We inherit from
``ParametricProblem`` (since the space invariant typically of this
methodology), just defining a simple *input-output* condition.

.. code:: ipython3

    class SnapshotProblem(ParametricProblem):
        output_variables = [f's{i}' for i in range(u.shape[1])]
        parameter_domain = CartesianDomain({'mu': [0, 100]})

        conditions = {
            'io': Condition(input_points=p_train, output_points=u_train)
        }

    poisson_problem = SnapshotProblem()

We can then build a ``PODRBF`` model (using a Radial Basis Function
interpolation as approximation) and a ``PODNN`` approach (using an MLP
architecture as approximation).

POD-RBF reduced order model
---------------------------

Then, we define the model we want to use, with the POD (``PODBlock``)
and the RBF (``RBFBlock``) objects.

.. code:: ipython3

    class PODRBF(torch.nn.Module):
        """
        Proper orthogonal decomposition with Radial Basis Function interpolation model.
        """

        def __init__(self, pod_rank, rbf_kernel):
            """

            """
            super().__init__()

            self.pod = PODBlock(pod_rank)
            self.rbf = RBFBlock(kernel=rbf_kernel)


        def forward(self, x):
            """
            Defines the computation performed at every call.

            :param x: The tensor to apply the forward pass.
            :type x: torch.Tensor
            :return: the output computed by the model.
            :rtype: torch.Tensor
            """
            coefficents = self.rbf(x)
            return self.pod.expand(coefficents)

        def fit(self, p, x):
            """
            Call the :meth:`pina.model.layers.PODBlock.fit` method of the
            :attr:`pina.model.layers.PODBlock` attribute to perform the POD,
            and the :meth:`pina.model.layers.RBFBlock.fit` method of the
            :attr:`pina.model.layers.RBFBlock` attribute to fit the interpolation.
            """
            self.pod.fit(x)
            self.rbf.fit(p, self.pod.reduce(x))

We can then fit the model and ask it to predict the required field for
unseen values of the parameters. Note that this model does not need a
``Trainer`` since it does not include any neural network or learnable
parameters.

.. code:: ipython3

    pod_rbf = PODRBF(pod_rank=20, rbf_kernel='thin_plate_spline')
    pod_rbf.fit(p_train, u_train)

.. code:: ipython3

    u_test_rbf = pod_rbf(p_test)
    u_train_rbf = pod_rbf(p_train)

    relative_error_train = torch.norm(u_train_rbf - u_train)/torch.norm(u_train)
    relative_error_test = torch.norm(u_test_rbf - u_test)/torch.norm(u_test)

    print('Error summary for POD-RBF model:')
    print(f'  Train: {relative_error_train.item():e}')
    print(f'  Test:  {relative_error_test.item():e}')


.. parsed-literal::

    Error summary for POD-RBF model:
      Train: 1.287801e-03
      Test:  1.217041e-03


POD-NN reduced order model
--------------------------

.. code:: ipython3

    class PODNN(torch.nn.Module):
        """
        Proper orthogonal decomposition with neural network model.
        """

        def __init__(self, pod_rank, layers, func):
            """

            """
            super().__init__()

            self.pod = PODBlock(pod_rank)
            self.nn = FeedForward(
                input_dimensions=1,
                output_dimensions=pod_rank,
                layers=layers,
                func=func
            )


        def forward(self, x):
            """
            Defines the computation performed at every call.

            :param x: The tensor to apply the forward pass.
            :type x: torch.Tensor
            :return: the output computed by the model.
            :rtype: torch.Tensor
            """
            coefficents = self.nn(x)
            return self.pod.expand(coefficents)

        def fit_pod(self, x):
            """
            Just call the :meth:`pina.model.layers.PODBlock.fit` method of the
            :attr:`pina.model.layers.PODBlock` attribute.
            """
            self.pod.fit(x)

We highlight that the POD modes are directly computed by means of the
singular value decomposition (computed over the input data), and not
trained using the backpropagation approach. Only the weights of the MLP
are actually trained during the optimization loop.

.. code:: ipython3

    pod_nn = PODNN(pod_rank=20, layers=[10, 10, 10], func=torch.nn.Tanh)
    pod_nn.fit_pod(u_train)

    pod_nn_stokes = SupervisedSolver(
        problem=poisson_problem,
        model=pod_nn,
        optimizer=torch.optim.Adam,
        optimizer_kwargs={'lr': 0.0001})

Now that we have set the ``Problem`` and the ``Model``, we have just to
train the model and use it for predicting the test snapshots.

.. code:: ipython3

    trainer = Trainer(
        solver=pod_nn_stokes,
        max_epochs=1000,
        batch_size=100,
        log_every_n_steps=5,
        accelerator='cpu')
    trainer.train()


.. parsed-literal::

    GPU available: True (cuda), used: False
    TPU available: False, using: 0 TPU cores
    IPU available: False, using: 0 IPUs
    HPU available: False, using: 0 HPUs
    /u/a/aivagnes/anaconda3/lib/python3.8/site-packages/pytorch_lightning/trainer/setup.py:187: GPU available but not used. You can set it by doing `Trainer(accelerator='gpu')`.

      | Name        | Type    | Params
    ----------------------------------------
    0 | _loss       | MSELoss | 0
    1 | _neural_net | Network | 460
    ----------------------------------------
    460       Trainable params
    0         Non-trainable params
    460       Total params
    0.002     Total estimated model params size (MB)
    /u/a/aivagnes/anaconda3/lib/python3.8/site-packages/torch/cuda/__init__.py:152: UserWarning:
        Found GPU0 Quadro K600 which is of cuda capability 3.0.
        PyTorch no longer supports this GPU because it is too old.
        The minimum cuda capability supported by this library is 3.7.

      warnings.warn(old_gpu_warn % (d, name, major, minor, min_arch // 10, min_arch % 10))



.. parsed-literal::

    Training: |          | 0/? [00:00<?, ?it/s]


.. parsed-literal::

    `Trainer.fit` stopped: `max_epochs=1000` reached.


Done! Now that the computational expensive part is over, we can load in
future the model to infer new parameters (simply loading the checkpoint
file automatically created by ``Lightning``) or test its performances.
We measure the relative error for the training and test datasets,
printing the mean one.

.. code:: ipython3

    u_test_nn = pod_nn_stokes(p_test)
    u_train_nn = pod_nn_stokes(p_train)

    relative_error_train = torch.norm(u_train_nn - u_train)/torch.norm(u_train)
    relative_error_test = torch.norm(u_test_nn - u_test)/torch.norm(u_test)

    print('Error summary for POD-NN model:')
    print(f'  Train: {relative_error_train.item():e}')
    print(f'  Test:  {relative_error_test.item():e}')


.. parsed-literal::

    Error summary for POD-NN model:
      Train: 3.767902e-02
      Test:  3.488588e-02


POD-RBF vs POD-NN
-----------------

We can of course also plot the solutions predicted by the ``PODRBF`` and
by the ``PODNN`` model, comparing them to the original ones. We can note
here, in the ``PODNN`` model and for low velocities, some differences,
but improvements can be accomplished thanks to longer training.

.. code:: ipython3

    idx = torch.randint(0, len(u_test), (4,))
    u_idx_rbf = pod_rbf(p_test[idx])
    u_idx_nn = pod_nn_stokes(p_test[idx])

    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

    fig, axs = plt.subplots(5, 4, figsize=(14, 9))

    relative_error_rbf = np.abs(u_test[idx] - u_idx_rbf.detach())
    relative_error_rbf = np.where(u_test[idx] < 1e-7, 1e-7, relative_error_rbf/u_test[idx])

    relative_error_nn = np.abs(u_test[idx] - u_idx_nn.detach())
    relative_error_nn = np.where(u_test[idx] < 1e-7, 1e-7, relative_error_nn/u_test[idx])

    for i, (idx_, rbf_, nn_, rbf_err_, nn_err_) in enumerate(
        zip(idx, u_idx_rbf, u_idx_nn, relative_error_rbf, relative_error_nn)):
        axs[0, i].set_title(f'$\mu$ = {p_test[idx_].item():.2f}')

        cm = axs[0, i].tricontourf(dataset.triang, rbf_.detach()) # POD-RBF prediction
        plt.colorbar(cm, ax=axs[0, i])

        cm = axs[1, i].tricontourf(dataset.triang, nn_.detach()) # POD-NN prediction
        plt.colorbar(cm, ax=axs[1, i])

        cm = axs[2, i].tricontourf(dataset.triang, u_test[idx_].flatten()) # Truth
        plt.colorbar(cm, ax=axs[2, i])

        cm = axs[3, i].tripcolor(dataset.triang, rbf_err_, norm=matplotlib.colors.LogNorm()) # Error for POD-RBF
        plt.colorbar(cm, ax=axs[3, i])

        cm = axs[4, i].tripcolor(dataset.triang, nn_err_, norm=matplotlib.colors.LogNorm()) # Error for POD-NN
        plt.colorbar(cm, ax=axs[4, i])

    plt.show()



.. image:: tutorial_files/tutorial_27_0.png

Commit message:

Colab tutorials (#367)
* Colab Button & Run added

docs/source/_rst/tutorials/tutorial8/tutorial.rst, after:

Tutorial: Reduced order model (POD-RBF or POD-NN) for parametric problems
=========================================================================

|Open In Colab|

.. |Open In Colab| image:: https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg
   :target: https://colab.research.google.com/github/mathLab/PINA/blob/master/tutorials/tutorial8/tutorial.ipynb

The tutorial aims to show how to employ the **PINA** library in order to
apply a reduced order modeling technique [1]. Such methodologies have
several similarities with machine learning approaches, since the main
goal consists in predicting the solution of differential equations
(typically parametric PDEs) in a real-time fashion.

In particular we are going to use the Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
with either Radial Basis Function Interpolation(POD-RBF) or Neural
Network (POD-NN) [2]. Here we basically perform a dimensional reduction
using the POD approach, and approximating the parametric solution
manifold (at the reduced space) using an interpolation (RBF) or a
regression technique (NN). In this example, we use a simple multilayer
perceptron, but the plenty of different architectures can be plugged as
well.

References
^^^^^^^^^^

1. Rozza G., Stabile G., Ballarin F. (2022). Advanced Reduced Order
   Methods and Applications in Computational Fluid Dynamics, Society for
   Industrial and Applied Mathematics.
2. Hesthaven, J. S., & Ubbiali, S. (2018). Non-intrusive reduced order
   modeling of nonlinear problems using neural networks. Journal of
   Computational Physics, 363, 55-78.

Let’s start with the necessary imports. It’s important to note the
minimum PINA version to run this tutorial is the ``0.1``.

.. code:: ipython3

    ## routine needed to run the notebook on Google Colab
    try:
      import google.colab
      IN_COLAB = True
    except:
      IN_COLAB = False
    if IN_COLAB:
      !pip install "pina-mathlab"
      
    %matplotlib inline

    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    import torch
    import pina

    from pina.geometry import CartesianDomain

    from pina.problem import ParametricProblem
    from pina.model.layers import PODBlock, RBFBlock
    from pina import Condition, LabelTensor, Trainer
    from pina.model import FeedForward
    from pina.solvers import SupervisedSolver

    print(f'We are using PINA version {pina.__version__}')


.. parsed-literal::

    We are using PINA version 0.1.1


We exploit the `Smithers <www.github.com/mathLab/Smithers>`__ library to
collect the parametric snapshots. In particular, we use the
``NavierStokesDataset`` class that contains a set of parametric
solutions of the Navier-Stokes equations in a 2D L-shape domain. The
parameter is the inflow velocity. The dataset is composed by 500
snapshots of the velocity (along :math:`x`, :math:`y`, and the
magnitude) and pressure fields, and the corresponding parameter values.

To visually check the snapshots, let’s plot also the data points and the
reference solution: this is the expected output of our model.

.. code:: ipython3

    from smithers.dataset import NavierStokesDataset
    dataset = NavierStokesDataset()

    fig, axs = plt.subplots(1, 4, figsize=(14, 3))
    for ax, p, u in zip(axs, dataset.params[:4], dataset.snapshots['mag(v)'][:4]):
        ax.tricontourf(dataset.triang, u, levels=16)
        ax.set_title(f'$\mu$ = {p[0]:.2f}')



.. image:: tutorial_files/tutorial_5_0.png


The *snapshots* - aka the numerical solutions computed for several
parameters - and the corresponding parameters are the only data we need
to train the model, in order to predict the solution for any new test
parameter. To properly validate the accuracy, we initially split the 500
snapshots into the training dataset (90% of the original data) and the
testing one (the reamining 10%). It must be said that, to plug the
snapshots into **PINA**, we have to cast them to ``LabelTensor``
objects.

.. code:: ipython3

    u = torch.tensor(dataset.snapshots['mag(v)']).float()
    p = torch.tensor(dataset.params).float()

    p = LabelTensor(p, labels=['mu'])
    u = LabelTensor(u, labels=[f's{i}' for i in range(u.shape[1])])

    ratio_train_test = 0.9
    n = u.shape
    n_train = int(u.shape[0] * ratio_train_test)
    n_test = u - n_train
    u_train, u_test = u[:n_train], u[n_train:]
    p_train, p_test = p[:n_train], p[n_train:]

It is now time to define the problem! We inherit from
``ParametricProblem`` (since the space invariant typically of this
methodology), just defining a simple *input-output* condition.

.. code:: ipython3

    class SnapshotProblem(ParametricProblem):
        output_variables = [f's{i}' for i in range(u.shape[1])]
        parameter_domain = CartesianDomain({'mu': [0, 100]})

        conditions = {
            'io': Condition(input_points=p_train, output_points=u_train)
        }

    poisson_problem = SnapshotProblem()

We can then build a ``PODRBF`` model (using a Radial Basis Function
interpolation as approximation) and a ``PODNN`` approach (using an MLP
architecture as approximation).

POD-RBF reduced order model
---------------------------

Then, we define the model we want to use, with the POD (``PODBlock``)
and the RBF (``RBFBlock``) objects.

.. code:: ipython3

    class PODRBF(torch.nn.Module):
        """
        Proper orthogonal decomposition with Radial Basis Function interpolation model.
        """

        def __init__(self, pod_rank, rbf_kernel):
            """

            """
            super().__init__()

            self.pod = PODBlock(pod_rank)
            self.rbf = RBFBlock(kernel=rbf_kernel)


        def forward(self, x):
            """
            Defines the computation performed at every call.

            :param x: The tensor to apply the forward pass.
            :type x: torch.Tensor
            :return: the output computed by the model.
            :rtype: torch.Tensor
            """
            coefficents = self.rbf(x)
            return self.pod.expand(coefficents)

        def fit(self, p, x):
            """
            Call the :meth:`pina.model.layers.PODBlock.fit` method of the
            :attr:`pina.model.layers.PODBlock` attribute to perform the POD,
            and the :meth:`pina.model.layers.RBFBlock.fit` method of the
            :attr:`pina.model.layers.RBFBlock` attribute to fit the interpolation.
            """
            self.pod.fit(x)
            self.rbf.fit(p, self.pod.reduce(x))

We can then fit the model and ask it to predict the required field for
unseen values of the parameters. Note that this model does not need a
``Trainer`` since it does not include any neural network or learnable
parameters.

.. code:: ipython3

    pod_rbf = PODRBF(pod_rank=20, rbf_kernel='thin_plate_spline')
    pod_rbf.fit(p_train, u_train)

.. code:: ipython3

    u_test_rbf = pod_rbf(p_test)
    u_train_rbf = pod_rbf(p_train)

    relative_error_train = torch.norm(u_train_rbf - u_train)/torch.norm(u_train)
    relative_error_test = torch.norm(u_test_rbf - u_test)/torch.norm(u_test)

    print('Error summary for POD-RBF model:')
    print(f'  Train: {relative_error_train.item():e}')
    print(f'  Test:  {relative_error_test.item():e}')


.. parsed-literal::

    Error summary for POD-RBF model:
      Train: 1.287801e-03
      Test:  1.217041e-03


POD-NN reduced order model
--------------------------

.. code:: ipython3

    class PODNN(torch.nn.Module):
        """
        Proper orthogonal decomposition with neural network model.
        """

        def __init__(self, pod_rank, layers, func):
            """

            """
            super().__init__()

            self.pod = PODBlock(pod_rank)
            self.nn = FeedForward(
                input_dimensions=1,
                output_dimensions=pod_rank,
                layers=layers,
                func=func
            )


        def forward(self, x):
            """
            Defines the computation performed at every call.

            :param x: The tensor to apply the forward pass.
            :type x: torch.Tensor
            :return: the output computed by the model.
            :rtype: torch.Tensor
            """
            coefficents = self.nn(x)
            return self.pod.expand(coefficents)

        def fit_pod(self, x):
            """
            Just call the :meth:`pina.model.layers.PODBlock.fit` method of the
            :attr:`pina.model.layers.PODBlock` attribute.
            """
            self.pod.fit(x)

We highlight that the POD modes are directly computed by means of the
singular value decomposition (computed over the input data), and not
trained using the backpropagation approach. Only the weights of the MLP
are actually trained during the optimization loop.

.. code:: ipython3

    pod_nn = PODNN(pod_rank=20, layers=[10, 10, 10], func=torch.nn.Tanh)
    pod_nn.fit_pod(u_train)

    pod_nn_stokes = SupervisedSolver(
        problem=poisson_problem,
        model=pod_nn,
        optimizer=torch.optim.Adam,
        optimizer_kwargs={'lr': 0.0001})

Now that we have set the ``Problem`` and the ``Model``, we have just to
train the model and use it for predicting the test snapshots.

.. code:: ipython3

    trainer = Trainer(
        solver=pod_nn_stokes,
        max_epochs=1000,
        batch_size=100,
        log_every_n_steps=5,
        accelerator='cpu')
    trainer.train()


.. parsed-literal::

    GPU available: True (cuda), used: False
    TPU available: False, using: 0 TPU cores
    IPU available: False, using: 0 IPUs
    HPU available: False, using: 0 HPUs
    /u/a/aivagnes/anaconda3/lib/python3.8/site-packages/pytorch_lightning/trainer/setup.py:187: GPU available but not used. You can set it by doing `Trainer(accelerator='gpu')`.

      | Name        | Type    | Params
    ----------------------------------------
    0 | _loss       | MSELoss | 0
    1 | _neural_net | Network | 460
    ----------------------------------------
    460       Trainable params
    0         Non-trainable params
    460       Total params
    0.002     Total estimated model params size (MB)
    /u/a/aivagnes/anaconda3/lib/python3.8/site-packages/torch/cuda/__init__.py:152: UserWarning:
        Found GPU0 Quadro K600 which is of cuda capability 3.0.
        PyTorch no longer supports this GPU because it is too old.
        The minimum cuda capability supported by this library is 3.7.

      warnings.warn(old_gpu_warn % (d, name, major, minor, min_arch // 10, min_arch % 10))



.. parsed-literal::

    Training: |          | 0/? [00:00<?, ?it/s]


.. parsed-literal::

    `Trainer.fit` stopped: `max_epochs=1000` reached.


Done! Now that the computational expensive part is over, we can load in
future the model to infer new parameters (simply loading the checkpoint
file automatically created by ``Lightning``) or test its performances.
We measure the relative error for the training and test datasets,
printing the mean one.

.. code:: ipython3

    u_test_nn = pod_nn_stokes(p_test)
    u_train_nn = pod_nn_stokes(p_train)

    relative_error_train = torch.norm(u_train_nn - u_train)/torch.norm(u_train)
    relative_error_test = torch.norm(u_test_nn - u_test)/torch.norm(u_test)

    print('Error summary for POD-NN model:')
    print(f'  Train: {relative_error_train.item():e}')
    print(f'  Test:  {relative_error_test.item():e}')


.. parsed-literal::

    Error summary for POD-NN model:
      Train: 3.767902e-02
      Test:  3.488588e-02


POD-RBF vs POD-NN
-----------------

We can of course also plot the solutions predicted by the ``PODRBF`` and
by the ``PODNN`` model, comparing them to the original ones. We can note
here, in the ``PODNN`` model and for low velocities, some differences,
but improvements can be accomplished thanks to longer training.

.. code:: ipython3

    idx = torch.randint(0, len(u_test), (4,))
    u_idx_rbf = pod_rbf(p_test[idx])
    u_idx_nn = pod_nn_stokes(p_test[idx])

    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

    fig, axs = plt.subplots(5, 4, figsize=(14, 9))

    relative_error_rbf = np.abs(u_test[idx] - u_idx_rbf.detach())
    relative_error_rbf = np.where(u_test[idx] < 1e-7, 1e-7, relative_error_rbf/u_test[idx])

    relative_error_nn = np.abs(u_test[idx] - u_idx_nn.detach())
    relative_error_nn = np.where(u_test[idx] < 1e-7, 1e-7, relative_error_nn/u_test[idx])

    for i, (idx_, rbf_, nn_, rbf_err_, nn_err_) in enumerate(
        zip(idx, u_idx_rbf, u_idx_nn, relative_error_rbf, relative_error_nn)):
        axs[0, i].set_title(f'$\mu$ = {p_test[idx_].item():.2f}')

        cm = axs[0, i].tricontourf(dataset.triang, rbf_.detach()) # POD-RBF prediction
        plt.colorbar(cm, ax=axs[0, i])

        cm = axs[1, i].tricontourf(dataset.triang, nn_.detach()) # POD-NN prediction
        plt.colorbar(cm, ax=axs[1, i])

        cm = axs[2, i].tricontourf(dataset.triang, u_test[idx_].flatten()) # Truth
        plt.colorbar(cm, ax=axs[2, i])

        cm = axs[3, i].tripcolor(dataset.triang, rbf_err_, norm=matplotlib.colors.LogNorm()) # Error for POD-RBF
        plt.colorbar(cm, ax=axs[3, i])

        cm = axs[4, i].tripcolor(dataset.triang, nn_err_, norm=matplotlib.colors.LogNorm()) # Error for POD-NN
        plt.colorbar(cm, ax=axs[4, i])

    plt.show()



.. image:: tutorial_files/tutorial_27_0.png
