Tutorial: Two dimensional Poisson problem using Extra Features Learning
=======================================================================

This tutorial presents how to solve with Physics-Informed Neural
Networks (PINNs) a 2D Poisson problem with Dirichlet boundary
conditions. We will train with standard PINNâ€™s training, and with
extrafeatures. For more insights on extrafeature learning please read
`An extended physics informed neural network for preliminary analysis of
parametric optimal control
problems <https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0898122123002018>`__.

First of all, some useful imports.

.. code:: ipython3

    import torch
    from torch.nn import Softplus
    
    from pina.problem import SpatialProblem
    from pina.operators import laplacian
    from pina.model import FeedForward
    from pina.solvers import PINN
    from pina.trainer import Trainer
    from pina.plotter import Plotter
    from pina.geometry import CartesianDomain
    from pina.equation import Equation, FixedValue
    from pina import Condition, LabelTensor
    from pina.callbacks import MetricTracker

The problem definition
----------------------

The two-dimensional Poisson problem is mathematically written as:

.. math::

    \begin{equation}
    \begin{cases}
    \Delta u = \sin{(\pi x)} \sin{(\pi y)} \text{ in } D, \\
    u = 0 \text{ on } \Gamma_1 \cup \Gamma_2 \cup \Gamma_3 \cup \Gamma_4,
    \end{cases}
    \end{equation}

where :math:`D` is a square domain :math:`[0,1]^2`, and
:math:`\Gamma_i`, with :math:`i=1,...,4`, are the boundaries of the
square.

The Poisson problem is written in **PINA** code as a class. The
equations are written as *conditions* that should be satisfied in the
corresponding domains. The *truth_solution* is the exact solution which
will be compared with the predicted one.

.. code:: ipython3

    class Poisson(SpatialProblem):
        output_variables = ['u']
        spatial_domain = CartesianDomain({'x': [0, 1], 'y': [0, 1]})
    
        def laplace_equation(input_, output_):
            force_term = (torch.sin(input_.extract(['x'])*torch.pi) *
                          torch.sin(input_.extract(['y'])*torch.pi))
            laplacian_u = laplacian(output_, input_, components=['u'], d=['x', 'y'])
            return laplacian_u - force_term
    
        # here we write the problem conditions
        conditions = {
            'gamma1': Condition(location=CartesianDomain({'x': [0, 1], 'y':  1}), equation=FixedValue(0.)),
            'gamma2': Condition(location=CartesianDomain({'x': [0, 1], 'y': 0}), equation=FixedValue(0.)),
            'gamma3': Condition(location=CartesianDomain({'x':  1, 'y': [0, 1]}), equation=FixedValue(0.)),
            'gamma4': Condition(location=CartesianDomain({'x': 0, 'y': [0, 1]}), equation=FixedValue(0.)),
            'D': Condition(location=CartesianDomain({'x': [0, 1], 'y': [0, 1]}), equation=Equation(laplace_equation)),
        }
    
        def poisson_sol(self, pts):
            return -(
                torch.sin(pts.extract(['x'])*torch.pi)*
                torch.sin(pts.extract(['y'])*torch.pi)
            )/(2*torch.pi**2)
        
        truth_solution = poisson_sol
    
    problem = Poisson()
    
    # let's discretise the domain
    problem.discretise_domain(25, 'grid', locations=['D'])
    problem.discretise_domain(25, 'grid', locations=['gamma1', 'gamma2', 'gamma3', 'gamma4'])

Solving the problem with standard PINNs
---------------------------------------

After the problem, the feed-forward neural network is defined, through
the class ``FeedForward``. This neural network takes as input the
coordinates (in this case :math:`x` and :math:`y`) and provides the
unkwown field of the Poisson problem. The residual of the equations are
evaluated at several sampling points (which the user can manipulate
using the method ``CartesianDomain_pts``) and the loss minimized by the
neural network is the sum of the residuals.

In this tutorial, the neural network is composed by two hidden layers of
10 neurons each, and it is trained for 1000 epochs with a learning rate
of 0.006 and :math:`l_2` weight regularization set to :math:`10^{-7}`.
These parameters can be modified as desired. We use the
``MetricTracker`` class to track the metrics during training.

.. code:: ipython3

    # make model + solver + trainer
    model = FeedForward(
        layers=[10, 10],
        func=Softplus,
        output_dimensions=len(problem.output_variables),
        input_dimensions=len(problem.input_variables)
    )
    pinn = PINN(problem, model, optimizer_kwargs={'lr':0.006, 'weight_decay':1e-8})
    trainer = Trainer(pinn, max_epochs=1000, callbacks=[MetricTracker()], accelerator='cpu', enable_model_summary=False) # we train on CPU and avoid model summary at beginning of training (optional)
    
    # train
    trainer.train()

.. parsed-literal::

    `Trainer.fit` stopped: `max_epochs=1000` reached.


.. parsed-literal::

    Epoch 999: : 1it [00:00, 105.33it/s, v_num=3, gamma1_loss=5.29e-5, gamma2_loss=4.09e-5, gamma3_loss=4.73e-5, gamma4_loss=4.18e-5, D_loss=0.00134, mean_loss=0.000304]


Now the ``Plotter`` class is used to plot the results. The solution
predicted by the neural network is plotted on the left, the exact one is
represented at the center and on the right the error between the exact
and the predicted solutions is showed.

.. code:: ipython3

    plotter = Plotter()
    plotter.plot(solver=pinn)



.. image:: tutorial_files/tutorial_9_0.png


Solving the problem with extra-features PINNs
---------------------------------------------

Now, the same problem is solved in a different way. A new neural network
is now defined, with an additional input variable, named extra-feature,
which coincides with the forcing term in the Laplace equation. The set
of input variables to the neural network is:

.. math:: 

    \begin{equation}
    [x, y, k(x, y)], \text{ with } k(x, y)=\sin{(\pi x)}\sin{(\pi y)},
    \end{equation}

where :math:`x` and :math:`y` are the spatial coordinates and
:math:`k(x, y)` is the added feature.

This feature is initialized in the class ``SinSin``, which needs to be
inherited by the ``torch.nn.Module`` class and to have the ``forward``
method. After declaring such feature, we can just incorporate in the
``FeedForward`` class thanks to the ``extra_features`` argument. **NB**:
``extra_features`` always needs a ``list`` as input, you you have one
feature just encapsulated it in a class, as in the next cell.

Finally, we perform the same training as before: the problem is
``Poisson``, the network is composed by the same number of neurons and
optimizer parameters are equal to previous test, the only change is the
new extra feature.

.. code:: ipython3

    class SinSin(torch.nn.Module):
        """Feature: sin(x)*sin(y)"""
        def __init__(self):
            super().__init__()
    
        def forward(self, x):
            t = (torch.sin(x.extract(['x'])*torch.pi) *
                 torch.sin(x.extract(['y'])*torch.pi))
            return LabelTensor(t, ['sin(x)sin(y)'])
    
    
    # make model + solver + trainer
    model_feat = FeedForward(
        layers=[10, 10],
        func=Softplus,
        output_dimensions=len(problem.output_variables),
        input_dimensions=len(problem.input_variables)+1
    )
    pinn_feat = PINN(problem, model_feat, extra_features=[SinSin()], optimizer_kwargs={'lr':0.006, 'weight_decay':1e-8})
    trainer_feat = Trainer(pinn_feat, max_epochs=1000, callbacks=[MetricTracker()], accelerator='cpu', enable_model_summary=False) # we train on CPU and avoid model summary at beginning of training (optional)
    
    # train
    trainer_feat.train()

.. parsed-literal::

    `Trainer.fit` stopped: `max_epochs=1000` reached.


.. parsed-literal::

    Epoch 999: : 1it [00:00, 85.62it/s, v_num=4, gamma1_loss=2.54e-7, gamma2_loss=2.17e-7, gamma3_loss=1.94e-7, gamma4_loss=2.69e-7, D_loss=9.2e-6, mean_loss=2.03e-6] 


The predicted and exact solutions and the error between them are
represented below. We can easily note that now our network, having
almost the same condition as before, is able to reach additional order
of magnitudes in accuracy.

.. code:: ipython3

    plotter.plot(solver=pinn_feat)



.. image:: tutorial_files/tutorial_14_0.png


Solving the problem with learnable extra-features PINNs
-------------------------------------------------------

We can still do better!

Another way to exploit the extra features is the addition of learnable
parameter inside them. In this way, the added parameters are learned
during the training phase of the neural network. In this case, we use:

.. math:: 

    \begin{equation}
    k(x, \mathbf{y}) = \beta \sin{(\alpha x)} \sin{(\alpha y)},
    \end{equation}

where :math:`\alpha` and :math:`\beta` are the abovementioned
parameters. Their implementation is quite trivial: by using the class
``torch.nn.Parameter`` we cam define all the learnable parameters we
need, and they are managed by ``autograd`` module!

.. code:: ipython3

    class SinSinAB(torch.nn.Module):
        """ """
        def __init__(self):
            super().__init__()
            self.alpha = torch.nn.Parameter(torch.tensor([1.0]))
            self.beta = torch.nn.Parameter(torch.tensor([1.0]))
    
    
        def forward(self, x):
            t =  (
                self.beta*torch.sin(self.alpha*x.extract(['x'])*torch.pi)*
                          torch.sin(self.alpha*x.extract(['y'])*torch.pi)
            )
            return LabelTensor(t, ['b*sin(a*x)sin(a*y)'])
    
    
    # make model + solver + trainer
    model_lean= FeedForward(
        layers=[10, 10],
        func=Softplus,
        output_dimensions=len(problem.output_variables),
        input_dimensions=len(problem.input_variables)+1
    )
    pinn_lean = PINN(problem, model_lean, extra_features=[SinSinAB()], optimizer_kwargs={'lr':0.006, 'weight_decay':1e-8})
    trainer_learn = Trainer(pinn_lean, max_epochs=1000, accelerator='cpu', enable_model_summary=False) # we train on CPU and avoid model summary at beginning of training (optional)
    
    # train
    trainer_learn.train()

.. parsed-literal::

    `Trainer.fit` stopped: `max_epochs=1000` reached.


.. parsed-literal::

    Epoch 999: : 1it [00:00, 85.94it/s, v_num=5, gamma1_loss=3.26e-8, gamma2_loss=7.84e-8, gamma3_loss=1.13e-7, gamma4_loss=3.02e-8, D_loss=2.66e-6, mean_loss=5.82e-7] 


Umh, the final loss is not appreciabily better than previous model (with
static extra features), despite the usage of learnable parameters. This
is mainly due to the over-parametrization of the network: there are many
parameter to optimize during the training, and the model in unable to
understand automatically that only the parameters of the extra feature
(and not the weights/bias of the FFN) should be tuned in order to fit
our problem. A longer training can be helpful, but in this case the
faster way to reach machine precision for solving the Poisson problem is
removing all the hidden layers in the ``FeedForward``, keeping only the
:math:`\alpha` and :math:`\beta` parameters of the extra feature.

.. code:: ipython3

    # make model + solver + trainer
    model_lean= FeedForward(
        layers=[],
        func=Softplus,
        output_dimensions=len(problem.output_variables),
        input_dimensions=len(problem.input_variables)+1
    )
    pinn_learn = PINN(problem, model_lean, extra_features=[SinSinAB()], optimizer_kwargs={'lr':0.01, 'weight_decay':1e-8})
    trainer_learn = Trainer(pinn_learn, max_epochs=1000, callbacks=[MetricTracker()], accelerator='cpu', enable_model_summary=False) # we train on CPU and avoid model summary at beginning of training (optional)
    
    # train
    trainer_learn.train()

.. parsed-literal::

    `Trainer.fit` stopped: `max_epochs=1000` reached.


.. parsed-literal::

    Epoch 999: : 1it [00:00, 98.81it/s, v_num=6, gamma1_loss=2.55e-16, gamma2_loss=4.76e-17, gamma3_loss=2.55e-16, gamma4_loss=4.76e-17, D_loss=1.74e-13, mean_loss=3.5e-14] 


In such a way, the model is able to reach a very high accuracy! Of
course, this is a toy problem for understanding the usage of extra
features: similar precision could be obtained if the extra features are
very similar to the true solution. The analyzed Poisson problem shows a
forcing term very close to the solution, resulting in a perfect problem
to address with such an approach.

We conclude here by showing the graphical comparison of the unknown
field and the loss trend for all the test cases presented here: the
standard PINN, PINN with extra features, and PINN with learnable extra
features.

.. code:: ipython3

    plotter.plot(solver=pinn_learn)



.. image:: tutorial_files/tutorial_21_0.png


Let us compare the training losses for the various types of training

.. code:: ipython3

    plotter.plot_loss(trainer, logy=True, label='Standard')
    plotter.plot_loss(trainer_feat, logy=True,label='Static Features')
    plotter.plot_loss(trainer_learn, logy=True, label='Learnable Features')




.. image:: tutorial_files/tutorial_23_0.png


Whatâ€™s next?
------------

Nice you have completed the two dimensional Poisson tutorial of
**PINA**! There are multiple directions you can go now:

1. Train the network for longer or with different layer sizes and assert
   the finaly accuracy

2. Propose new types of extrafeatures and see how they affect the
   learning

3. Exploit extrafeature training in more complex problems

4. Many moreâ€¦
